---
title: "German student views on the Middle East conflict after October 7, 2023: Israel-focused antisemitism or non-antisemitic criticism of Israel?"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/ispp-2026
venue: "Newcastle University"
date: 2026-07-16
location: "Newcastle, United Kingdom"
---

## Conference 

ISPP's 2026 Annual Meeting

## Contributors 

Platt, Oliver (presenter), Heyder, Aribert & Kolkwitz-Anstötz, Pascal

## Abstract
At the latest, but not only since Hamas' terrorist attack and the subsequent war in Gaza, empirical research into antisemitism, as well as any private or public debate, requires a clear distinction between legitimate criticism of Israel's policies and Israel-focused antisemitism, that is, the projection of antisemitic resentments onto Israel as the “collective Jew” (Klug, 2003). This is also reflected in the ongoing debate over which definition (IHRA vs. JDA) better protects against antisemitism while simultaneously safeguarding free speech. As this topic regained prominence after October 7, 2023, universities were increasingly portrayed as places where purported criticism of Israel serves as a vehicle for antisemitic views, a perspective also reflected in a motion adopted by the German Bundestag on addressing antisemitism in educational institutions (20/14703, 2025). However, systematic research on this claim in the German context is scarce (c.f. Hinz et al., 2024, 2025; Lutter et al., 2025), and the findings remain inconclusive.
Drawing on two self-selected student samples fielded during the winter breaks 2024/25 (N=167) and 2025/26 (N=173), we (a) assess convergent and criterion validity of commonly employed and new survey measurements on traditional and modern forms of antisemitism as well as criticism of Israeli policies towards the Palestinians applying confirmatory factor analysis. In addition, (b) we evaluate predictive and concurrent validity applying structural models including key correlates of antisemitism (such as social-dominance orientation and authoritarianism). Finally, (c) we examine how students’ views on the Gaza war relate to latent dimensions of antisemitism and non-antisemitic criticism of Israel. Here, we deepen insights into narratives guiding student’s survey responses by category selection probing with open-ended follow-up questions in the second sample (Behr et al., 2017).
Among other findings, and in contrast to the prevailing public discourse, our results show, on the one hand, that university students’ views regarding a possible genocide in Gaza are strongly associated with non-antisemitic criticism of Israeli policy, and, on the other hand, that Israel-focused antisemitism is indeed closely linked to traditional forms of antisemitism. 
